docs/guides/high-availability/connect-keycloak-to-external-infinispan.adoc, before:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Connect {project_name} with an external {jdgserver_name}"
summary="Building block for an Infinispan deployment on Kubernetes"
tileVisible="false" >

This topic describes advanced {jdgserver_name} configurations for {project_name} on Kubernetes.

== Prerequisites

* <@links.ha id="deploy-keycloak-kubernetes" /> as it will be extended.
* <@links.ha id="deploy-infinispan-kubernetes-crossdc" />.

== Procedure

. Create a Secret with the username and password to connect to the external {jdgserver_name} deployment:
+
[source,yaml]
----
include::examples/generated/keycloak-ispn.yaml[tag=keycloak-ispn-secret]
----

. Extend the {project_name} Custom Resource with `additionalOptions` as shown below.
+
[NOTE]
====
* All the memory, resource and database configurations are skipped from the CR below as they have been described in <@links.ha id="deploy-keycloak-kubernetes" /> {section} already.
Administrators should leave those configurations untouched.
====
+
[source,yaml]
----
include::examples/generated/keycloak-ispn.yaml[tag=keycloak-ispn]
----
<1> The hostname of the remote {jdgserver_name} cluster.
<2> The port of the remote {jdgserver_name} cluster.
This is optional and it default to `11222`.
<3> The Secret `name` and `key` with the {jdgserver_name} username credential.
<4> The Secret `name` and `key` with the {jdgserver_name} password credential.
<5> The `spi-connections-infinispan-quarkus-site-name` is an arbitrary {jdgserver_name} site name which {project_name} needs for its embedded {jdgserver_name} deployment when a remote store is used.
This site-name is related only to the embedded {jdgserver_name} and does not need to match any value from the external {jdgserver_name} deployment.
If you are using multiple sites for {project_name} in a cross-DC setup such as <@links.ha id="deploy-infinispan-kubernetes-crossdc" />, the site name must be different in each site.

</@tmpl.guide>

Commit message:

Added more information about the concepts applied here
Fixes #27508

Signed-off-by: Alexander Schwartz <aschwart@redhat.com>

docs/guides/high-availability/connect-keycloak-to-external-infinispan.adoc, after:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Connect {project_name} with an external {jdgserver_name}"
summary="Building block for an Infinispan deployment on Kubernetes"
tileVisible="false"
includedOptions="cache-remote-*" >

This topic describes advanced {jdgserver_name} configurations for {project_name} on Kubernetes.

== Architecture

This connects {project_name} to {jdgserver_name} using TCP connections secured by TLS 1.3.
It uses the {project_name}'s truststore to verify {jdgserver_name}'s server certificate.
As {project_name} is deployed using its Operator on OpenShift in the prerequisites listed below, the Operator already added the `service-ca.crt` to the truststore which is used to sign {jdgserver_name}'s server certificates.
In other environments, add the necessary certificates to {project_name}'s truststore.

== Prerequisites

* <@links.ha id="deploy-keycloak-kubernetes" /> as it will be extended.
* <@links.ha id="deploy-infinispan-kubernetes-crossdc" />.

== Procedure

. Create a Secret with the username and password to connect to the external {jdgserver_name} deployment:
+
[source,yaml]
----
include::examples/generated/keycloak-ispn.yaml[tag=keycloak-ispn-secret]
----

. Extend the {project_name} Custom Resource with `additionalOptions` as shown below.
+
[NOTE]
====
All the memory, resource and database configurations are skipped from the CR below as they have been described in <@links.ha id="deploy-keycloak-kubernetes" /> {section} already.
Administrators should leave those configurations untouched.
====
+
[source,yaml]
----
include::examples/generated/keycloak-ispn.yaml[tag=keycloak-ispn]
----
<1> The hostname of the remote {jdgserver_name} cluster.
<2> The port of the remote {jdgserver_name} cluster.
This is optional and it default to `11222`.
<3> The Secret `name` and `key` with the {jdgserver_name} username credential.
<4> The Secret `name` and `key` with the {jdgserver_name} password credential.
<5> The `spi-connections-infinispan-quarkus-site-name` is an arbitrary {jdgserver_name} site name which {project_name} needs for its embedded {jdgserver_name} deployment when a remote store is used.
This site-name is related only to the embedded {jdgserver_name} and does not need to match any value from the external {jdgserver_name} deployment.
If you are using multiple sites for {project_name} in a cross-DC setup such as <@links.ha id="deploy-infinispan-kubernetes-crossdc" />, the site name must be different in each site.

</@tmpl.guide>
