docs/guides/high-availability/operate-failover.adoc, before:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Fail over to the secondary site"
summary="This describes the automatic and operational procedures necessary" >

This {section} describes the steps to fail over from primary site to secondary site in a setup as outlined in <@links.ha id="concepts-active-passive-sync" /> together with the blueprints outlined in <@links.ha id="bblocks-active-passive-sync" />.

== When to use procedure

A failover from the primary site to the secondary site will happen automatically based on the checks configured in the loadbalancer.

When the primary site loses its state in {jdgserver_name} or a network partition occurs that prevents the synchronization, manual procedures are necessary to recover the primary site before it can handle traffic again, see the <@links.ha id="operate-switch-back" /> {section}.

To prevent an automatic fallback to the primary site before those manual steps have been performed, configure the loadbalancer as described following to prevent this from happening automatically.

For a graceful switch to the secondary site, follow the instructions in the <@links.ha id="operate-switch-over" /> {section}.

See the <@links.ha id="introduction" /> {section} for different operational procedures.

== Procedure

Follow these steps to manually force a failover.

=== Route53

To force Route53 to mark the primary site as permanently not available and prevent an automatic fallback, edit the health check in AWS to point to a non-existent route (`health/down`).

</@tmpl.guide>

Commit message:

Document Failover Lambda for Active/Passive deployments
Closes #29787

Signed-off-by: Ryan Emerson <remerson@redhat.com>
Signed-off-by: Alexander Schwartz <aschwart@redhat.com>
Co-authored-by: Alexander Schwartz <aschwart@redhat.com>
Co-authored-by: Alexander Schwartz <alexander.schwartz@gmx.net>
Co-authored-by: andymunro <48995441+andymunro@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/guides/high-availability/operate-failover.adoc, after:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Fail over to the secondary site"
summary="This describes the automatic and operational procedures necessary" >

This {section} describes the steps to fail over from primary site to secondary site in a setup as outlined in <@links.ha id="concepts-active-passive-sync" /> together with the blueprints outlined in <@links.ha id="bblocks-active-passive-sync" />.

== When to use procedure

A failover from the primary site to the secondary site will happen automatically based on the checks configured in the loadbalancer.

When the primary site loses its state in {jdgserver_name} or a network partition occurs that prevents the synchronization, manual procedures are necessary to recover the primary site before it can handle traffic again, see the <@links.ha id="operate-switch-back" /> {section}.

To prevent fallback to the primary site before those manual steps have been performed, follow the procedure outlined in this guide.

For a graceful switch to the secondary site, follow the instructions in the <@links.ha id="operate-switch-over" /> {section}.

See the <@links.ha id="introduction" /> {section} for different operational procedures.

== Procedure

Follow these steps to prevent an automatic failover back to the Primary site or to manually force a failover.

=== Route53

To force Route53 to mark the primary site as permanently not available and prevent an automatic fallback, edit the health check in AWS to point to a non-existent route (`/lb-check-failed-over`).

== Optional: Failover Lambda

To prevent a failed Primary cluster from becoming active without SRE input, follow the steps outlined in the
guide <@links.ha id="deploy-aws-route53-failover-lambda" />

</@tmpl.guide>
