docs/documentation/server_admin/topics/threat/brute-force.adoc, before:


[[password-guess-brute-force-attacks]]
=== Brute force attacks

A brute force attack attempts to guess a user's password by trying to log in multiple times. {project_name} has brute force detection capabilities and can temporarily disable a user account if the number of login failures exceeds a specified threshold.

[NOTE]
====
{project_name} disables brute force detection by default. Enable this feature to protect against brute force attacks.
====

.Procedure

To enable this protection:

. Click *Realm Settings* in the menu
. Click the *Security Defenses* tab.
. Click the *Brute Force Detection* tab.
+
.Brute force detection
image:images/brute-force.png[]

{project_name} can deploy permanent lockout and temporary lockout actions when it detects an attack. Permanent lockout disables a user account until an administrator re-enables it. Temporary lockout disables a user account for a specific period of time.
The time period that the account is disabled increases as the attack continues and subsequent failures reach multiples of `Max Login Failures`.

[NOTE]
====
When a user is temporarily locked and attempts to log in, {project_name} displays the default `Invalid username or password` error message. This message is the same error message as the message displayed for an invalid username or invalid password to ensure the attacker is unaware the account is disabled.
====

*Common Parameters*

|===
|Name |Description |Default

|Max Login Failures
|The maximum number of login failures.
|30 failures.

|Quick Login Check Milliseconds
|The minimum time between login attempts.
|1000 milliseconds.

|Minimum Quick Login Wait
|The minimum time the user is disabled when login attempts are quicker than _Quick Login Check Milliseconds_.
|1 minute.

|===

*Temporary Lockout Parameters*

|===
|Name |Description |Default

|Wait Increment
|The time added to the time a user is temporarily disabled when the user's login attempts exceed _Max Login Failures_.
|1 minute.

|Max Wait
|The maximum time a user is temporarily disabled.
|15 minutes.

|Failure Reset Time
|The time when the failure count resets. The timer runs from the last failed login. Make sure this number is always greater than `Max wait`; otherwise the effective
wait time will never reach the value you have set to `Max wait`.
|12 hours.

|===

*Temporary Lockout Algorithm*
====
. On successful login
.. Reset `count`
. On failed login
.. If the time between this failure and the last failure is greater than _Failure Reset Time_
... Reset `count`
.. Increment `count`
.. Calculate `wait` using _Wait Increment_ * (`count` / _Max Login Failures_). The division is an integer division rounded down to a whole number
.. If `wait` equals 0 and the time between this failure and the last failure is less than _Quick Login Check Milliseconds_, set `wait` to _Minimum Quick Login Wait_.
... Temporarily disable the user for the smallest of `wait` and _Max Wait_ seconds
... Increment the temporary lockout counter

`count` does not increment when a temporarily disabled account commits a login failure.
====

For instance, if you have set `Max Login Failures` to `5` and a `Wait Increment` of `30` seconds, the effective time an account will be disabled after several failed authentication attempts will be:

[cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|`Number of Failures` | `Wait Increment`  | `Max Login Failures` | `Effective Wait Time`
|1 |30 | 5 | 0
|2 |30 | 5 | 0
|3 |30 | 5 | 0
|4 |30 | 5 | 0
|**5** |**30** | 5 | **30**
|6 |30 | 5 | 30
|7 |30 | 5 | 30
|8 |30 | 5 | 30
|9 |30 | 5 | 30
|**10** |**30** | 5 | **60**
|===

Note that the `Effective Wait Time` at the 5th failed attempt will disable the account for `30` seconds. Only after reaching
the next multiple of `Max Login Failures`, in this case `10`, will the time increase from `30` to `60`. The time the account will be disabled
is only increased when reaching multiples of `Max Login Failures`.

*Permanent Lockout Parameters*

|===
|Name |Description |Default

|Max temporary Lockouts
|The maximum number of temporary lockouts permitted before permanent lockout occurs.
|0
|===

*Permanent Lockout Flow*
====
. Follow temporary lockout flow
. If temporary lockout counter exceeds Max temporary lockouts
.. Permanently disable user

When {project_name} disables a user, the user cannot log in until an administrator enables the user. Enabling an account resets the `count`.
====

The downside of {project_name} brute force detection is that the server becomes vulnerable to denial of service attacks. When implementing a denial of service attack, an attacker can attempt to log in by guessing passwords for any accounts it knows and eventually causing {project_name} to disable the accounts.

Consider using intrusion prevention software (IPS). {project_name} logs every login failure and client IP address failure. You can point the IPS to the {project_name} server's log file, and the IPS can modify firewalls to block connections from these IP addresses.

==== Password policies

Ensure you have a complex password policy to force users to choose complex passwords. See the <<_password-policies, Password Policies>> chapter for more information. Prevent password guessing by setting up the {project_name} server to use one-time-passwords.

Commit message:

Add option to make temporary user lockout more transparent to the user
Signed-off-by: twobiers <22715034+twobiers@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/documentation/server_admin/topics/threat/brute-force.adoc, after:


[[password-guess-brute-force-attacks]]
=== Brute force attacks

A brute force attack attempts to guess a user's password by trying to log in multiple times. {project_name} has brute force detection capabilities and can temporarily disable a user account if the number of login failures exceeds a specified threshold.

[NOTE]
====
{project_name} disables brute force detection by default. Enable this feature to protect against brute force attacks.
====

.Procedure

To enable this protection:

. Click *Realm Settings* in the menu
. Click the *Security Defenses* tab.
. Click the *Brute Force Detection* tab.
+
.Brute force detection
image:images/brute-force.png[]

{project_name} can deploy permanent lockout and temporary lockout actions when it detects an attack. Permanent lockout disables a user account until an administrator re-enables it. Temporary lockout disables a user account for a specific period of time.
The time period that the account is disabled increases as the attack continues and subsequent failures reach multiples of `Max Login Failures`.

*Common Parameters*

|===
|Name |Description |Default

|Max Login Failures
|The maximum number of login failures.
|30 failures.

|Quick Login Check Milliseconds
|The minimum time between login attempts.
|1000 milliseconds.

|Minimum Quick Login Wait
|The minimum time the user is disabled when login attempts are quicker than _Quick Login Check Milliseconds_.
|1 minute.

|===

*Temporary Lockout Parameters*

|===
|Name |Description |Default

|Transparent to user
|When a user is temporarily locked and attempts to log in, {project_name} displays the default `Invalid username or password` error message. This message is the same error message as the message displayed for an invalid username or invalid password to ensure the attacker is unaware the account is disabled. This setting will display a more transparent message to the user.
|off

|Wait Increment
|The time added to the time a user is temporarily disabled when the user's login attempts exceed _Max Login Failures_.
|1 minute.

|Max Wait
|The maximum time a user is temporarily disabled.
|15 minutes.

|Failure Reset Time
|The time when the failure count resets. The timer runs from the last failed login. Make sure this number is always greater than `Max wait`; otherwise the effective
wait time will never reach the value you have set to `Max wait`.
|12 hours.

|===

*Temporary Lockout Algorithm*
====
. On successful login
.. Reset `count`
. On failed login
.. If the time between this failure and the last failure is greater than _Failure Reset Time_
... Reset `count`
.. Increment `count`
.. Calculate `wait` using _Wait Increment_ * (`count` / _Max Login Failures_). The division is an integer division rounded down to a whole number
.. If `wait` equals 0 and the time between this failure and the last failure is less than _Quick Login Check Milliseconds_, set `wait` to _Minimum Quick Login Wait_.
... Temporarily disable the user for the smallest of `wait` and _Max Wait_ seconds
... Increment the temporary lockout counter

`count` does not increment when a temporarily disabled account commits a login failure.
====

For instance, if you have set `Max Login Failures` to `5` and a `Wait Increment` of `30` seconds, the effective time an account will be disabled after several failed authentication attempts will be:

[cols="1,1,1,1"]
|===
|`Number of Failures` | `Wait Increment`  | `Max Login Failures` | `Effective Wait Time`
|1 |30 | 5 | 0
|2 |30 | 5 | 0
|3 |30 | 5 | 0
|4 |30 | 5 | 0
|**5** |**30** | 5 | **30**
|6 |30 | 5 | 30
|7 |30 | 5 | 30
|8 |30 | 5 | 30
|9 |30 | 5 | 30
|**10** |**30** | 5 | **60**
|===

Note that the `Effective Wait Time` at the 5th failed attempt will disable the account for `30` seconds. Only after reaching
the next multiple of `Max Login Failures`, in this case `10`, will the time increase from `30` to `60`. The time the account will be disabled
is only increased when reaching multiples of `Max Login Failures`.

*Permanent Lockout Parameters*

|===
|Name |Description |Default

|Max temporary Lockouts
|The maximum number of temporary lockouts permitted before permanent lockout occurs.
|0
|===

*Permanent Lockout Flow*
====
. Follow temporary lockout flow
. If temporary lockout counter exceeds Max temporary lockouts
.. Permanently disable user

When {project_name} disables a user, the user cannot log in until an administrator enables the user. Enabling an account resets the `count`.
====

The downside of {project_name} brute force detection is that the server becomes vulnerable to denial of service attacks. When implementing a denial of service attack, an attacker can attempt to log in by guessing passwords for any accounts it knows and eventually causing {project_name} to disable the accounts.

Consider using intrusion prevention software (IPS). {project_name} logs every login failure and client IP address failure. You can point the IPS to the {project_name} server's log file, and the IPS can modify firewalls to block connections from these IP addresses.

==== Password policies

Ensure you have a complex password policy to force users to choose complex passwords. See the <<_password-policies, Password Policies>> chapter for more information. Prevent password guessing by setting up the {project_name} server to use one-time-passwords.
