docs/guides/server/health.adoc, before:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/options.adoc" as opts>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Enabling {project_name} Health checks"
summary="Learn how to enable and use {project_name} health checks"
includedOptions="health-enabled">

{project_name} has built in support for health checks. This {section} describes how to enable and use the {project_name} health checks.

== {project_name} health check endpoints

{project_name} exposes 4 health endpoints:

* `/health/live`
* `/health/ready`
* `/health/started`
* `/health`

See the https://quarkus.io/guides/smallrye-health#running-the-health-check[Quarkus SmallRye Health docs] for information on the meaning of each endpoint.

These endpoints respond with HTTP status `200 OK` on success or `503 Service Unavailable` on failure, and a JSON object like the following:

.Successful response for endpoints without additional per-check information:
[source, json]
----
{
    "status": "UP",
    "checks": []
}
----

.Successful response for endpoints with information on the database connection:
[source, json]
----
{
    "status": "UP",
    "checks": [
        {
            "name": "Keycloak database connections health check",
            "status": "UP"
        }
    ]
}
----

== Enabling the health checks
It is possible to enable the health checks using the build time option `health-enabled`:

<@kc.build parameters="--health-enabled=true"/>

By default, no check is returned from the health endpoints.

== Using the health checks

It is recommended that the health endpoints be monitored by external HTTP requests. Due to security measures that remove `curl` and other packages from the {project_name} container image, local command-based monitoring will not function easily.

If you are not using {project_name} in a container, use whatever you want to access the health check endpoints.

=== curl

You may use a simple HTTP HEAD request to determine the `+live+` or `+ready+` state of {project_name}. `+curl+` is a good HTTP client for this purpose.

If {project_name} is deployed in a container, you must run this command from outside it due to the previously mentioned security measures. For example:

[source, bash]
----
curl --head -fsS http://localhost:8080/health/ready
----

If the command returns with status 0, then {project_name} is `+live+` or `+ready+`, depending on which endpoint you called. Otherwise there is a problem.

=== Kubernetes

Define a https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/#http-probes[HTTP Probe] so that Kubernetes may externally monitor the health endpoints. Do not use a liveness command.

=== HEALTHCHECK

The Dockerfile image `+HEALTHCHECK+` instruction defines a command that will be periodically executed inside the container as it runs. The {project_name} container does not have any CLI HTTP clients installed. Consider installing `+curl+` as an additional RPM, as detailed by the <@links.server id="containers" /> {section}. Note that your container may be less secure because of this.

== Available Checks

The table below shows the available checks.

[%autowidth]
|===
|Check | Description | Requires Metrics

|Database
|Returns the status of the database connection pool.
|Yes

|===

For some checks, you'll need to also enable metrics as indicated by the `Requires Metrics` column. To enable metrics
use the `metrics-enabled` option as follows:

<@kc.build parameters="--health-enabled=true --metrics-enabled=true"/>

</@tmpl.guide>

Commit message:

docs: Support management port for health and metrics (#28213)
Relates to #19334

Signed-off-by: Martin Bartoš <mabartos@redhat.com>
Co-authored-by: Alexander Schwartz <aschwart@redhat.com>
Co-authored-by: Václav Muzikář <vmuzikar@redhat.com>

docs/guides/server/health.adoc, after:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/options.adoc" as opts>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Enabling {project_name} Health checks"
summary="Learn how to enable and use {project_name} health checks"
includedOptions="health-enabled">

{project_name} has built in support for health checks. This {section} describes how to enable and use the {project_name} health checks.
The {project_name} health checks are exposed on the management port `9000` by default. For more details, see <@links.server id="management-interface" />

== {project_name} health check endpoints

{project_name} exposes 4 health endpoints:

* `/health/live`
* `/health/ready`
* `/health/started`
* `/health`

See the https://quarkus.io/guides/smallrye-health#running-the-health-check[Quarkus SmallRye Health docs] for information on the meaning of each endpoint.

These endpoints respond with HTTP status `200 OK` on success or `503 Service Unavailable` on failure, and a JSON object like the following:

.Successful response for endpoints without additional per-check information:
[source, json]
----
{
    "status": "UP",
    "checks": []
}
----

.Successful response for endpoints with information on the database connection:
[source, json]
----
{
    "status": "UP",
    "checks": [
        {
            "name": "Keycloak database connections health check",
            "status": "UP"
        }
    ]
}
----

== Enabling the health checks
It is possible to enable the health checks using the build time option `health-enabled`:

<@kc.build parameters="--health-enabled=true"/>

By default, no check is returned from the health endpoints.

== Using the health checks

It is recommended that the health endpoints be monitored by external HTTP requests. Due to security measures that remove `curl` and other packages from the {project_name} container image, local command-based monitoring will not function easily.

If you are not using {project_name} in a container, use whatever you want to access the health check endpoints.

=== curl

You may use a simple HTTP HEAD request to determine the `+live+` or `+ready+` state of {project_name}. `+curl+` is a good HTTP client for this purpose.

If {project_name} is deployed in a container, you must run this command from outside it due to the previously mentioned security measures. For example:

[source, bash]
----
curl --head -fsS http://localhost:9000/health/ready
----

If the command returns with status 0, then {project_name} is `+live+` or `+ready+`, depending on which endpoint you called. Otherwise there is a problem.

=== Kubernetes

Define a https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/#http-probes[HTTP Probe] so that Kubernetes may externally monitor the health endpoints. Do not use a liveness command.

=== HEALTHCHECK

The Dockerfile image `+HEALTHCHECK+` instruction defines a command that will be periodically executed inside the container as it runs. The {project_name} container does not have any CLI HTTP clients installed. Consider installing `+curl+` as an additional RPM, as detailed by the <@links.server id="containers" /> {section}. Note that your container may be less secure because of this.

== Available Checks

The table below shows the available checks.

[%autowidth]
|===
|Check | Description | Requires Metrics

|Database
|Returns the status of the database connection pool.
|Yes

|===

For some checks, you'll need to also enable metrics as indicated by the `Requires Metrics` column. To enable metrics
use the `metrics-enabled` option as follows:

<@kc.build parameters="--health-enabled=true --metrics-enabled=true"/>

</@tmpl.guide>
