docs/guides/server/management-interface.adoc, before:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Configuring the Management Interface"
summary="Learn how to configure {project_name}'s management interface for endpoints like metrics and health checks."
includedOptions="http-management-* https-management-* legacy-observability-interface">

The management interface allows accessing management endpoints via a different HTTP server than the primary one.
It provides the possibility to hide endpoints like `/metrics` or `/health` from the outside world and, therefore, hardens the security.
The most significant advantage might be seen in Kubernetes environments as the specific management port might not be exposed.

== Management interface configuration

The management interface is turned on by default, so management endpoints such as `/metrics`, and `/health` are exposed on the default management port `9000`.
In order to change the port for the management interface, you can use the {project_name} option `http-management-port`.

The management interface provides a set of options and is fully configurable.
If these options for the management HTTP server are not explicitly set, their values are automatically inherited from the default HTTP server.

You can change the relative path of the management interface, as the prefix path for the management endpoints can be different.
You can achieve it via the {project_name} option `http-management-relative-path`.

For instance, if you set the CLI option `--http-management-relative-path=/management`, the metrics, and health endpoints will be accessed on the `/management/metrics` and `/management/health` paths.

NOTE: If you do not explicitly set the value for it, the value from the `http-relative-path` property is used. For instance,
if you set the CLI option `--http-relative-path=/auth`, these endpoints are accessible on the `/auth/metrics` and `/auth/health` paths.

== TLS support

When the TLS is set for the default {project_name} server, the management interface will be accessible through HTTPS as well.
The management interface can run only either on HTTP or HTTPS, not both as for the main server.

Specific {project_name} management interface options with the prefix `https-management-*` were provided for setting different TLS parameters for the management HTTP server. Their function is similar to their counterparts for the main HTTP server, for details see <@links.server id="enabletls" />.
When these options are not explicitly set, the TLS parameters are inherited from the default HTTP server.

== Disable Management interface

The management interface is automatically turned off when nothing is exposed on it.
Currently, only health checks and metrics are exposed on the management interface regardless.
If you want to disable exposing them on the management interface, set the {project_name} property `legacy-observability-interface` to `true`.

[WARNING]
====
Exposing health and metrics endpoints on the default server is not recommended for security reasons, and you should always use the management interface.
Beware, the `legacy-observability-interface` option is deprecated and will be removed in future releases.
It only allows you to give more time for the migration.
====

</@tmpl.guide>

Commit message:

Do not inherit 'https-client-auth' property for the management interface
Closes #30094

Co-authored-by: Steven Hawkins <shawkins@redhat.com>
Signed-off-by: Martin Bartoš <mabartos@redhat.com>

docs/guides/server/management-interface.adoc, after:

<#import "/templates/guide.adoc" as tmpl>
<#import "/templates/kc.adoc" as kc>
<#import "/templates/links.adoc" as links>

<@tmpl.guide
title="Configuring the Management Interface"
summary="Learn how to configure {project_name}'s management interface for endpoints like metrics and health checks."
includedOptions="http-management-* https-management-* legacy-observability-interface">

The management interface allows accessing management endpoints via a different HTTP server than the primary one.
It provides the possibility to hide endpoints like `/metrics` or `/health` from the outside world and, therefore, hardens the security.
The most significant advantage might be seen in Kubernetes environments as the specific management port might not be exposed.

== Management interface configuration

The management interface is turned on by default, so management endpoints such as `/metrics`, and `/health` are exposed on the default management port `9000`.
In order to change the port for the management interface, you can use the {project_name} option `http-management-port`.

The management interface provides a set of options and is fully configurable.
If these options for the management HTTP server are not explicitly set, their values are automatically inherited from the default HTTP server in most cases (see options description).

You can change the relative path of the management interface, as the prefix path for the management endpoints can be different.
You can achieve it via the {project_name} option `http-management-relative-path`.

For instance, if you set the CLI option `--http-management-relative-path=/management`, the metrics, and health endpoints will be accessed on the `/management/metrics` and `/management/health` paths.

NOTE: If you do not explicitly set the value for it, the value from the `http-relative-path` property is used. For instance,
if you set the CLI option `--http-relative-path=/auth`, these endpoints are accessible on the `/auth/metrics` and `/auth/health` paths.

== TLS support

When the TLS is set for the default {project_name} server, the management interface will be accessible through HTTPS as well.
The management interface can run only either on HTTP or HTTPS, not both as for the main server.

Specific {project_name} management interface options with the prefix `https-management-*` are provided for setting different TLS parameters for the management HTTP server.
Their function is similar to their counterparts for the main HTTP server, for details see <@links.server id="enabletls" />.
When these options are not explicitly set, the TLS parameters are inherited from the default HTTP server (except `https-management-client-auth`).

To enable mTLS for the management interface, you need to explicitly set the `https-management-client-auth` option.

== Disable Management interface

The management interface is automatically turned off when nothing is exposed on it.
Currently, only health checks and metrics are exposed on the management interface regardless.
If you want to disable exposing them on the management interface, set the {project_name} property `legacy-observability-interface` to `true`.

[WARNING]
====
Exposing health and metrics endpoints on the default server is not recommended for security reasons, and you should always use the management interface.
Beware, the `legacy-observability-interface` option is deprecated and will be removed in future releases.
It only allows you to give more time for the migration.
====

</@tmpl.guide>
