js/apps/keycloak-server/README.md, before:

# Keycloak Server

This app allows you to run a local development version of the Keycloak server.

### Running the Keycloak server

First, ensure that all dependencies are installed locally using PNPM by running:

```bash
pnpm install
```

After the dependencies are installed we can start the Keycloak server by running the following command:

```bash
pnpm start
```

This will download the [Nightly version](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/releases/tag/nightly) of the Keycloak server and run it locally on port `8180`. If a previously downloaded version was found in the `server/` directory then that one will be used instead. If you want to download the latest Nightly version you can remove the server directory before running the command to start the server.

If you want to run with a local Quarkus distribution of Keycloak for development purposes, you can do so by running this command instead: 

```bash
pnpm start -- --local
```

**All other arguments will be passed through to the underlying Keycloak server.**

In order for the development version of the Admin UI to work you will have to import a custom client to the Keycloak server. This is only required during development as the development server for the Admin UI runs on a different port. This client will be imported automatically under the name `security-admin-console-v2` when the Keycloak server starts.

This client only allows redirects from/to "localhost:8080" so be sure either modify the client json in `./scripts` or only attempt to authenticate and redirect from that address

Commit message:

Run the Vite dev server through the Keycloak server (#27311) (#30373)
Closes #19750
Closes #28643
Closes #30115

Signed-off-by: Jon Koops <jonkoops@gmail.com>
(cherry picked from commit c7361ccf6e3079dffd72e191e839822b3309c446)

js/apps/keycloak-server/README.md, after:

# Keycloak Server

This app allows you to run a local development version of the Keycloak server.

### Running the Keycloak server

First, ensure that all dependencies are installed locally using PNPM by running:

```sh
pnpm install
```

After the dependencies are installed we can start the Keycloak server by running the following command:

```sh
pnpm start
```

If you want to run the server against a local development Vite server, you'll have to pass the `--admin-dev` or `--account-dev` flag:

```sh
pnpm start --admin-dev
pnpm start --account-dev
```

The above commands will download the [Nightly version](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/releases/tag/nightly) of the Keycloak server and run it locally on port `8080`. If a previously downloaded version was found in the `server/` directory then that one will be used instead. If you want to download the latest Nightly version you can remove the server directory before running the command to start the server:

```sh
pnpm delete-server
```

Or if you just want to clear the data so you can start fresh without downloading the server again:

```sh
pnpm delete-data
```

If you want to run with a local Quarkus distribution of Keycloak for development purposes, you can do so by running this command instead: 

```sh
pnpm start --local
```

**All other arguments will be passed through to the underlying Keycloak server.**

In order for the development version of the Admin UI to work you will have to import a custom client to the Keycloak server. This is only required during development as the development server for the Admin UI runs on a different port. This client will be imported automatically under the name `security-admin-console-v2` when the Keycloak server starts.

This client only allows redirects from/to "localhost:8080" so be sure either modify the client json in `./scripts` or only attempt to authenticate and redirect from that address
