# Contributing guide

## Keycloak Quarkus Extension

Keycloak on Quarkus is basically a Quarkus Extension. For more details about extensions, please take a look at [Writing Your Own Extension](https://quarkus.io/guides/writing-extensions) guide.

As an extension, the server can be embedded in any Quarkus application by adding the following dependency:

```
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.keycloak</groupId>
        <artifactId>keycloak-quarkus-server</artifactId>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

Just like any other extension, the server extension has two main modules:

* `deployment`
* `runtime`

Within the `deployment` module you'll find the implementation for the build steps that run when (re)augmenting the application. This module
is responsible for all metadata processing, such as:

* Lookup SPIs and their providers and enable/disable them accordingly
* Create a closed-world assumption about the providers that should be registered to the `KeycloakSessionFactory`
* Customizations to how Hibernate, Resteasy, Liquibase, Infinispan, and other dependencies are configured and bootstrapped
* Creating Jandex indexes for some server dependencies

The output of this module is bytecode generated by Quarkus that improves the server startup time and memory usage so that any processing
done during (re)augmentation does not happen again when actually starting the server. Note that the code from this module does
not run at all at runtime (when running the server) but only when building the project (the `server` module in particular, more on that later) or when triggering
a re-augmentation when running the `build` command.

Within the `runtime` module you'll find the code that is run at runtime when starting and running the server. The main link between
the `deployment` and `runtime` modules is the `org.keycloak.quarkus.runtime.KeycloakRecorder` class. The `KeycloakRecorder` holds
a set of methods that are invoked from build steps that will end up in recorded bytecode. The recorded bytecode executes those methods at runtime
just like they were called when a build step is run, with the exact same arguments and values, if any.

As an example, let us look at how the SPIs and their providers are discovered and how the `KeycloakSessionFactory` is created. 
Quarkus will run the `org.keycloak.quarkus.deployment.KeycloakProcessor.configureProviders` build step whenever you are (re)augmenting the server. The main outcome from this method
is to invoke the `org.keycloak.quarkus.runtime.KeycloakRecorder.configSessionFactory` so that the code from this method is executed at
*runtime* with a closed-world assumption about the providers that should be registered to the `KeycloakSessionFactory`. At runtime the code from that method is executed
and a `KeycloakSessionFactory` is created without any processing to discover SPIs and their providers.

There are a few reasons why we have Keycloak as a Quarkus extension:

* More control over the build-time augmentation and runtime stages.
* More flexibility when extending Quarkus itself and the extensions used by the server (e.g.: Hibernate, Resteasy, etc.)
* Make it easier to embed the server into Quarkus applications
* Make it possible to allow Keycloak developers to customize the server distribution

## Keycloak Server

The `server` module holds the Keycloak Server itself. It is basically a regular Quarkus application using the `keycloak-quarkus-server` extension. If you look at the
[pom.xml](server/pom.xml) from this module you'll notice that it is a very simple Quarkus application with the bare minimum configuration
to actually build and run the server.

As Quarkus application, the server is a [mutable](https://quarkus.io/guides/reaugmentation#how-to-re-augment-a-quarkus-application) application using the 
[mutable-jar](server/src/main/resources/application.properties) package type. As a mutable application, Keycloak is able to allow
users to configure some aspects of the server without having to re-build this module, something impractical from a user perspective.

The mutability of the server is directly related to the `build` command. As mentioned before, the build steps from the `deployment` module
are only run when (re)augmenting the server and when running the `build` command, the server will indicate to Quarkus that the build steps
should re-run and the recorded bytecode should be updated to reflect any change to the server configuration.

From a Quarkus perspective, the server is also a [Command Mode Application](https://quarkus.io/guides/command-mode-reference) and provides
a CLI based on [Picocli](https://picocli.info/). As such, there is a single entrypoint that executes the code to execute the CLI and bootstrap the server. This entry point
is the `org.keycloak.quarkus.runtime.KeycloakMain` class from the `runtime` module.

## Keycloak Distribution

The server distribution is created by build the `dist` module. This module basically consists of packaging the `deployment`, `runtime`,
and `server` modules artifacts and their dependencies to a `ZIP` or tarball file.

Within this directory you'll find the directory structure of the distribution and what is included in it.

## Running the server in development mode

As a regular Quarkus application, you are able to run the `server` module in [dev mode](https://quarkus.io/guides/maven-tooling#dev-mode) just like any regular application:

```
cd server
mvn clean quarkus:dev -Dquarkus.args="start-dev"
```

You can set any command or configuration option to the server by setting the `quarkus.args` environment variable.

When running in dev mode, you can benefit from the dev mode capabilities from Quarkus but with some limitations. The main limitations you'll find
at the moment are:

* Changes are only automatically reflected at runtime if you are changing resources from the `deployment`, `runtime`, and `server` modules. Other modules, such as `keycloak-services` still rely on Hot Swap in Java debuggers to reload classes.
* There is nothing in the Dev UI related to the server itself, although you can still change some configuration from there.
* There are some limitations when passing some options when running in dev mode. You should expect more improvements in this area.

We are working to improve the dev experience, and you should expect improvements over time.

## Debugging the server distribution

The `kc.sh|bat` script allows you to remotely debug the distribution. For that, you should run the server as follows:

```
kc.sh --debug start-dev
```

By default, the debug port is available at `8787`.

An additional environment variable `DEBUG_SUSPEND` can be set to suspend the JVM, when launched in debug mode. The `DEBUG_SUSPEND` variable supports the following values:

* `y` - The debug mode JVM launch is suspended
* `n` - The debug mode JVM is started without suspending

Suspending the JVM when in debug mode is useful if you want to debug the early stages of the bootstrap code.

When making changes to the `deployment`, `runtime`, or `server` modules, you can update the distribution with the new artifacts by executing
the following command:

```
mvn -DskipTests clean install
```

After the `quarkus` module and sub-modules are built, you can update the distribution as follows:

```
cp -r server/target/lib ${KC_HOME_DIR}
```

In the example above, the `${KC_HOME_DIR}` variable points to the root directory of the distribution.

You should also be able to update a server dependency directly. For that, copy the jar to the following location:

```
cp services/target/keycloak-services-${KC_VERSION}.jar ${KC_HOME_DIR}/lib/lib/main/org.keycloak.keycloak-services-${KC_VERSION}.jar
```

## Running tests

The distribution has its own distribution and the main tests are within the [tests/integration](tests/integration) module.

The test suite has two main types of tests:

* `jvm`
* `distribution`

The `jvm` tests execute both the test class and server within the same JVM. While the `distribution` tests execute the server
by running the distribution in a separte JVM.

The `distribution` tests are marked as such using the `DistributionTest` annotation. If not marked with this annotation, the test is a `JVM` test.

To run the tests, execute the following command within the `quarkus` module:

```
mvn clean install
```

By default, the tests will run using a raw distribution. If you want to run tests from the [tests/integration](tests/integration) module directly,
please make sure the distribution was built with the latest changes you did to it and its dependencies.

### Running tests using a container

You can also run tests using a container instead of the raw distribution by setting the `kc.quarkus.tests.dist` property as follows:

```
mvn clean install -Dkc.quarkus.tests.dist=docker
```

When setting the `kc.quarkus.tests.dist` to `docker` tests will run using a container instead of the raw distribution.

### Running storage tests

The storage tests are disabled by default but can be activated using the `test-database` profile:

```
mvn clean install -Ptest-database -Dtest=PostgreSQLDistTest
```

### Running tests from the IDE

You are also able to run tests from your IDE. For that, choose a test from the [tests/integration](tests/integration) module 
and execute it accordingly.

### Running tests from the `base` testsuite

Sometimes you might want to run the tests from the `base` test suite using the distribution. For that, make sure you have built the `quarkus` module
and then execute the following command from the project root directory:

```
mvn -f testsuite/integration-arquillian/pom.xml clean install -Pauth-server-quarkus -Dtest=OIDCProtocolMappersTest
```

## Documentation

The documentation is a set of guides available from the [docs](../docs/guides/src/main/server) module. Please,
look at the this [guide](../docs/building.md) about how to update and build the distribution guides.

## Before contributing the changes

Before contributing changes, make to read the main [Keycloak Contributing Guide](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Please, make sure:

* Documentation is updated if you are introducing any new behavior or changing an existing one that needs to be communicated
* Make sure you have a test within the [tests/integration](tests/integration) module to cover the changes
* You probably want to run a full build of the `quarkus` module, including running tests, to make sure you won't be surprised by failures in CI.

## References

* [Configuration Guide](https://www.keycloak.org/server/configuration)
* [Re-augmentation](https://quarkus.io/guides/reaugmentation)
* [Command Mode Application](https://quarkus.io/guides/command-mode-reference)